You had to have Texas history. At least two. Yeah, I
think you had to have Texas history. You also had to
have U.S. history. And so, I can't remember who
taught me U.S. history. Did you have notes, Nance?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I did have notes, Nance. The one I
remember, I had an English professor that taught
Shakespeare. And... He was very good. He sat on his
desk and had a cigarette hanging out of his mouth,
but he could tell he loved the subject. And, you
know, I enjoyed that course. Remember his name?
That doesn't ring a bell with me. No, it doesn't. He
wasn't here very long. Then I had a Spanish
professor, very, I thought he was very, very good.
He's extremely unpopular with other students,
so, his name was Statham, and you weren't to be here
with him. He was let go the next year. But when you
walked in there, have done your homework and
learned your vocabulary because the first thing
he gave you a pop quiz and that was good for me and uh
and i learned spanish surprisingly i took a uh i
took spanish and german the german wolf walk it do
you remember him i didn't think him as being very
good teacher georgia joe wilkett yeah and uh I
mean, I didn't learn my German, even though I have a
German background, as much as I did my Spanish, and
I went on to another semester of Spanish. How large
were the classes in those days? Except for the
lectures, like in freshman chemistry and things
like that, from, I would say, 25 to 60. One thing
that, I'm being honest, one thing that really
disenchanted me was my
And the professor insulted my intelligence. He
said, you will turn in a 30-page term paper or
something like that two days before grades are due
in.
And there were 60 people in the class. You
understand what I'm saying?
I mean, no way he can read 60 times 30 pages in that
period of time. So I, I mean, I did what it was
deserved. I went to the library, went just to the
library, got a, where it was by, you know, by topic,
took out about 10 books or 20, 15 books, checked
them out, took them back to my, the night before
they were due, set it up in my little typewriter and
typed out I would paraphrase what he was saying,
make some transition. I'd just paraphrase
exactly what he was saying, make some stupid
transition over to the next section, type it, turn
it in, got a B plus on it. I mean, it taught me these
educators are full of bull. I had no respect for
them. Hardly for people in education majors,
hardly. I mean, if that was, and I spent the whole
time talking about, should we have round
classrooms, or should we have square classrooms,
and oh, it was hogwash. You know, I mean, and it was,
I mean, sorry, but I get on high horse when I talk
about that. All right. When you came back, did you
have a car? Yes. My mother and father had gone to
Germany, and they left their 41 Plymouth with me.
Made me very popular. I was very popular. My
brother was back though. He was married and he was
milking cows and trying to get through. He had a
couple of children before he graduated and he kept
the car during the week. My parents left it with me
because he was not as compliant as I was. He was
three years older than me. Very intelligent. He
kept the car and then I got it on weekends. And I went
to every basketball game. I went all over the
state. I gave rides for the sports information
director, coming back, going there. I filed on the
AP wire for him. I was sports editor of the
battalion by my senior year, my life semester
here, coach sports editor of the battalion.
Describe the battalion and being on the battalion
staff. What was the battalion like in those days?
was
the Inner Sanctum editorial page, I'd say, was
more liberal than A&M. The sports page was, I
think, much more service. The sports page, if we
ever took anything off the AP or UPI wire, we felt we
were really being lazy and not doing our job. We
felt that there was enough at A&M of interest of
other students to communicate, and we wrote a lot
of features. It was a weekly then? No, five days a
week. I spent eight hours a day on that rascal. Who
was the advisor director? Roland Bing. Great.
Roland Bing. B-I-N-G? B-I-N-G. And he later
became president of Victoria Junior College. And
we were in Goodwin Hall, second floor. And he would
take the battalion and punch it up on, there was a
chalkboard. And he would circle it right out here
and tell us what we'd done wrong after we'd written
on it. And I had a ball, it was lovely, you know. And-
Now you weren't planning to be a journalist. No.
You were just doing it for- No, they ran an
advertisement. I said it was easy for me. And then
we'd go back and say, well, I got my nickname. I
moved into this outfit with Country Higgins, a
football player, Walter Norton Country Higgins.
And I found my grades, I could keep up in decent
grades without doing much studying or working. I
spent a lot of time in the sack. He walked in one day
and said, Sporty, you've spent so much time in SAC,
I'm going to call you SAC. Well, he's the only one
who did that. So then one day I would go over to the
athletic fields. I'd watch the basketball team
practice, football team practice. I'd even watch
the track team practice. Can you imagine watching
the track team practice? Running around, just
running around and laughing. And so one day I read
in the battalion they need sportswriters. Gee,
I'd probably know more about what's going on in
sports here than almost anybody on campus. I'd
rather be out there and observe it. So I went on and
volunteered. And one thing different then, I
think, that the battalion could, we, number one,
we did not think that we had to arrange the world to
our mindset. We did not take ourselves too
seriously. We had fun. And In the sports page, we
would take one reporter and say, you're covering
the freshman baseball team, you're covering the
varsity baseball team, you're covering the
freshman track team, varsity track team, and
things like that. And we'd fight for space for
those people. We wanted to give write-ups to Paul
Lemming. I knew Paul. Oh, Paul Lemming's coming to
A&M? Best hire on the nation, you know. And so we'd
get things like that. Then we'd interview him when
he got here and stuff like that. Paul says he's got a
lot of things written by me. about him.
Describe the coaches and the kind of people they
were, the head coaches. Well, when it came, Norton
was a coach.
Homer Norton. Homer Norton was a coach, coached
the national championship team, won 19 straight
games, 39-40.
My father said his handshake was like shaking
hands with a dead fish. He did not like his
handshake. But I think Homer Norton was extremely
loyal to his players. He would do anything to help
his players. He did not give any sports writing
moves.
He did not change with the times, though. Before he
came in, he still wanted to run the single wing.
Army, West Point, were playing with plastic
helmets. He was still using helmets. SMU came in
with low-cut shoes, and he was still playing
high-top shoes. Maybe it was a financial
situation, I don't know, but he didn't change with
the times that
way. He had Bill James. He had maybe five or six
assistant coaches. There was no strength and
conditioning coach as far as I know. There was a
trainer, various ones. Marty Corot was a
basketball coach and baseball coach, no
assistants or even a job, doubled up. Kern Landy
was a track coach, assisted voluntarily by Ray
Putnam. He had been here when I was a fish. What kind
of person was Colonel Andy? Somewhat, I guess,
probably irascible, though I have very good
memories of him, because when I was a lieutenant in
Germany, I'd covered the truck team for him, with
him, and Boyle and Bones came over there, and I met
them at the Grand Hotel in Nuremberg, two
different occasions. It made me feel real good,
because they saw me and came up and threw their arms
around
And they hugged me, because I never asked them
stupid questions. I observed, I didn't need to ask
questions, I was there watching the practice, and
they really seemed to appreciate it. So, Colonel
Andy took me to, let me ride the train with the track
team up to the Commerce Track meet in Arkansas,
Fayetteville, Arkansas.
Were those men positive influences on the lives of
their athletes? I don't think so, yes. Yes. A good
friend of mine, Ray Holbrook, a classmate, I would
say yes. Did athletes go to class? Yes, yes, yes.
Were there any giveaway courses or majors for
athletes?
would probably be the closest. They'd give seven a
year, probably PE more. Some guys I knew had really
high GPAs in PE. I'm not really qualified to answer
that question. But there were a number of athletes
that made splendid grades, weren't you? Oh, yeah.
Oh, sure. Oh, and the strange thing was the guys you
would think were the big linemen, you know, Odell
Stolzenberger, Joe Turley, and Bob Gary,
today would be 3.5 students. We had a three point
grade point at that time, not a four point. So they
were 2.5 or whatever, something like that. And
when you reporters were doing your reporting, you
wrote it on pads, and then you typed it up. There
wasn't much electronics. Nothing electronic in
that sense. We'd type it up, and I'd grind it out.
And I could grind out a lot, and I wrote a lot. Did you
go to the out-of-town games? Oh, yes. Did you
travel with the team, save the basketball?
Sometimes I did, sometimes I didn't. I would go for
fun. That's when I went with...
where Doug King was the sports information
director. And he'd drive with me up to Dallas and
see a basketball game. We'd drive back that night.
And he was taken advantage of by the guy that the
sports information director did not work for the
athletic department. He worked for the
information director of A&M. And Doug was
expected, after he'd travel at night, he was
expected to be in the office at 8 o'clock the next
morning, which was totally unfair. Who was the
guy's name? Somebody knows. But everybody says
the same thing about him. He was a very unfair kind
of guy to work for. But the sports information
department did not work for the athletic
director. It worked for the university. All
right, now when you come back from the war in the
fall of 46, the president of A&M at that point was
who? Gilchrist. Gilchrist. Describe him from the
student's point of view as president. Very
suspect. Suspect of what? Not being in sympathy
with the Aggie way of life. Okay. What? No, I say
okay. Being a TCIP background. Did he? Not having a
great admiration for his engineering ability
because he supposedly designed Gilchrist Folly.
Ever heard of Gilchrist Folly? The Road to Hearn.
Apparently it's not railroad tracks. And you got
there and then you made a 90 degree turn over an
overpass over to the other side of the railroad
track and made another 90 degree turn to go through
Hearn. And that was known as Gilchrist Folly
because he was the head of the Texas Highway
Department and that was built. I doubt if he had
anything to do with the design of that. But he got
the blame for it. Describe as far as you can
remember it the circumstances that led up to and
the March on the President's House.
Okay. It all began when the first thing that the
cadets knew, as far as I know, and I, all my
classmates were seniors at that time, Cadet
Colonel Ed Brandt, Rick Cush, and the battalion
came out with the headline, I still, New Code of
Corps Enacted to Our Place. New Code of the Corps.
Code of the Corps, which took away the authority of
the senior court and instituted this new
organization called the Student Senate. There
had never been a Student Senate to that point.
As far as I know, they did it without any laying the
groundwork for the real reason that it really was
necessary to do it.
And I'll explain from my point of view, and I wasn't
on the inner circle, but all of these veterans
coming back, many of them not taking ROTC, not in
any way, shape, or form. People who had been
captains, majors, but had never had any college.
Coming back as freshmen, they did not want to get in
the Corps and go through fish year and all that
stuff in the Corps. And there were no way for them to
be represented within the student government.
They were not part of the And therefore had no
input. I think the Corps members would have been
receptive to that if it had been explained that
we've got to make some adjustments. But the
administration, as far as I know, it just hit a
bang, an accomplished thing. And there was a media
hubbub gathering in the Corps. And I was living in
that dormitory, kind of running over to the right
there, and all of a sudden a talk show started
talking about a march. They followed the Corps out
just before midnight and marched over to that
President's home by Savisa. And they walked up,
some of them, not the cadet colonel and not Rick
Hoech, not some of the higher strength people, and
knocked on his door. He came to the door, in a
bathrobe at least, maybe a night shirt, and they
walked up and threw their senior rank at his feet.
Then everybody dispersed and went back to their
rooms.
Ed Grant, Rick Hush, and a few others did not
participate in that. So there was a senior class
meeting, which I attended.
They held a vote in the old British way, parting,
standing, moving over and so on. And I am proud of
this. I'll be very proud of this. They came to Rick
Cush and they said that we've got to recommend to
Rick that he resign his commission as the senior
class's classmate. And I thought, that's Rick
Cush's business, not their business. He doesn't
want to do it, he doesn't want to do it. Everybody, I
was the only one who voted against that. I mean,
looking back, it took some guts of courage. I was
all alone over there. Everybody else was over
here. But I'm with individuals. I thought, hey,
that's his individual right. He'll do it. He
thinks he's right. And so I basically voted with
the administration. But then a couple of days
later, they had a knee that came out. You would go
and talk to your senior branch advisor about how
you voted. Now, that bothered me. That's a secret.
It's none of their business to know how Bob Spode
voted. I could have gotten in real good favor
because I voted their way. So we voted, no, we will
not go and talk to our senior branch advisor. Then
on Friday afternoon, they changed that to about 4
or 3, 3.30, 4 o'clock. You'll just go and talk. You
don't have to tell them how you are. You just go and
talk. Well, it's too late to have another senior
class meeting. But we'd already voted. We
wouldn't talk to them. So I didn't go and talk. And
so I had to appear before a board with Colonel
Malloy. And my senior transcripts of that board,
there was one scared young guy up there. Yes, sir.
No, sir. Yes, sir. Because my other dream had come
true. I had two dreams. One, college I developed,
get a PhD in history. I didn't think I'd ever do it,
but I took the two languages just as a possibility
in the future. Then one day I walked in ROTC and they
said, and the other one was my childhood in a
regular Army commission. And they walked in and
said, now if you're in the top 50% of your class, top
quarter of your ROTC class, the Army started this
new program called Distinguished Military
Student, Distinguished Military Graduate. And
if you are in this, you can be a Distinguished
Military Student. If you maintain it, you will be
called a Distinguished Military Graduate. And at
that time, the Army will tend
It's like, here are your dreams. I mean, I had those
qualities. You mean that's all there is to it?
Yeah. So I went out and saw Colonel Olson right
after that. And it just processed. But I was now in
danger. I thought I might be in danger of losing
that. But it's not complying with that order. And I
got put on probation. That's all for the semester.
And I behaved myself.
The only interesting thing that happened all year
was that later he was four-star general, of
course. All right, now that march on the
president's house, he didn't back down, did he?
No, no, no, no, no, no. There was no change. They
started, the new court of court was enacted. I
mean, wasn't anything students could do about it.
No, but I do think that they could have greased the
skids a little bit better ahead of time, if you
understand what I mean. I don't know, maybe they
did with some of the cadet officers like McCush and
Head Ranch. But if they did, they didn't
communicate it down to the other people. Was there
anyone for you during those years that you, any
senior, any faculty or staff person you talked to
that you got advice, counsel from? No, not really.
Who told you to take two languages in case you got a
PhD? I heard somewhere. I took German and Spanish.
Looking backward, I should have taken French. It
would have been a better one. But my father's
mother, my grandmother, whom I love very dearly
and who loved me, was very anti-French. She was a
German coming out of Germany right after the
Franco-Prussian War. And she endued me with a
dislike for the French. very much so, and I did not
want to take French because it was rough on them. I
mean, I'm sorry, but that's the way it was. Now,
among the other changes during these years, there
were lots of student wives in and around the
campus, weren't there? Yeah. And were there more
of them employed on campus? I assume there were. I
don't know. Were you here during the, did you go to
summer, take summer classes? No, I never took
summer classes. Okay. When I came back after, the
first year I came back, I went to ROTC summer camp.
My parents were in Germany. My home was with an aunt
down in Beaumont. And so I kind of, she was kind of
the home away from home. And I joined the Beaumont
A&M Club, I mean the Beaumont Club here at A&M. I
kind of was with it. And then the next summer, My
aunt and I went to Germany on a freighter out of
Galveston and went up to the, up the Baser River to
Bremen where my father was stationed. Now, I'm
getting away from A&M, but you might find it
interesting, 1936 my father was a sharecropper in
Texas. In 1946 he had a private railroad car. He had
a sergeant to take care of the railroad car. He
lived in the home of an affluent German banker. He
was lord of all he surveyed. He commanded a
battalion of railway security police over there.
He could hook that railway car to any train, go
anywhere in Germany, and go with my mother, with
sleepers and the whole little... And I'm assuming
that he spoke German? He spoke German. He spoke
German. And his last name? He never spoke English.
He never spoke a word of English until the first
grade. And that last name didn't handicap him over
there? No, no, no, no, no, no. My, my, my. We went to
call on my grandfather's people who were left
there. Most of them were killed in Russia, they
said. One woman there had been an official
photographer with the Nazi Party. She had
pictures and gave us pictures of Hitler meeting
with Mussolini at Bremer Pass and things like
that. Very cold fish. and she was very much a part of
the Nazi movement. Went out to my grandmother's
place, she was definitely present, Fokker's Lair
near Hammelburg, and of course they tried to call
it up to my father who was in the Army of Occupation,
and I went out there and visited with them too, and
she was, when I say this, she was very, very, very
definitely a peasant. Alright, then you come back
for your senior year in the fall of 47? Fall of 48.
Summer of 47, RMTC at Fort Hood, summer of 48 in
Germany. Alright, now let's see, let's start
making some comparisons. There wasn't a Reveille
in those years. No, Reveille died about 43. And the
Yales and the Yale leaders and all those
traditions were about what you had remembered.
What about Bonfire by 1948? Was it bigger? No.
Yale practice was not yet midnight Yale practice.
Only on away trips. Oh, okay. At midnight Yale
practice, and there was a fight down in San
Antonio. I don't know if you ever heard about this
one or not. There was a riot in San Antonio because
the city fathers of San Antonio refused to set a
site for midnight yell practice in San Antonio. So
the yell leaders got on the marquee of a hotel in San
Antonio, and the Aggies gathered there and were
blocking traffic down in downtown. And the police
came, tried to break it up, and the Aggies pulled
out their knives and sliced the tires of the police
cars. And they called out the National Guard. And
riot police, and they came into the triangular
formation, which the Army teaches, fixed
bayonets to disperse this crowd of Aggies. We were
playing Texas Tech down at the Alamo Stadium
there. And so that was, that was what they, so it did
happen at the ideal practice. I was there and I saw
that. I didn't, I wasn't right in the midst of the
Aggie crowd, but I was watching it from a distance.
Do you remember whether anybody got arrested or
not? I don't remember. I don't remember. I came
close to it because I became a little bit berserk
later on as the National Guard approached me and my
friends had to restrain me. Let's see. Of all the
football games when you were an undergraduate,
what was your favorite game? Which one do you
remember that you enjoyed most? Was there a
special one? It was a very enjoyable period. that
we did not have very good teams.
Undergraduate.
I guess when we tied Texas in 1948, 14 to 14, Tom
Landry was playing for Texas. Texas had a good
team. We had not won a game. We were nothing and
nine. and went over and tied them, and made it
nothing in 9-1. And at the same time here, there was
another upset. Navy tied Army when Army had a great
team. And that was another kind of upset. And I
thought it was kind of coincidental that the two,
they were tied at the same year. During those
years, what were the most prestigious positions
of student leadership that an Aggie student could
have? Could have? And how were they selected as far
as you and your buddies knew? Was it a fair system?
Yeah.
I never heard anybody complain about it. The
person who was selected usually deserved it. We
thought. And y'all voted. I recognized it. I
didn't know everything in the background and all
the considerations. And was there a vote on Yale
leaders? Yeah. And did anybody, was there even a
president of the student body then? There
were class presidents.
Were you aware that there were any secret
fraternities then? As far as I know, there were no
secret fraternities. In fact, when we It was after
the war that they permitted honorary
fraternities. There was no Greek on campus. There
weren't even honorary fraternities until after
war. Does that correspond with what you know?
Y'all weren't aware of the TTs and the stickers?
Were they? Okay. No. They were very secretive. And
they were...
Guyon Hall was a place where everybody went for
movies and other big, were there any famous
visitors in those post-war years? Other than band
leaders. Who? What were some of the great bands
that came? Ballman Grove, Xavier Cougon, Spike
Jonze,
one of the names, Jimmy, Tommy Dorsey. I think
Tommy Dorsey came. And the big dances were held in
Sabisa? Sabisa Hall, lovely. And how did Aggies
behave at those? How did they treat those young
ladies? Well, I guess one of the incidents that
occurred with me, I saw myself as, I loved Galahad,
loved Storrs and King out there, and I read them as a
kid, Book of Knowledge, and My idea, my hero in all
fiction was Galahad. His strength was his team
because his heart was pure. And I later learned
that my heart couldn't be pure, but I thought it was
a good goal. And I went to one dance over there, and I
was stag. And I saw this sloppy, drunk Aggie
dancing with this nice-looking girl. And I felt so
sorry for her that he was just falling all over her
and everything else. And this is a joke on me. I
wonder what cut in on them. I told her I felt sorry
for her, and I came to her house at night coming to
her rescue. And she told me, why don't you mind
your own business? You know, that's what life's
disillusioning moments. But by and large, Aggies
didn't overdrink it, though.